[MUSIC]
Let's return to the example at the end
of lesson two where we have a normal
likelihood, with unknown mean and
unknown variance.
To remind ourselves,
let's write the model.
The response for individual I given mu and
sigma squared is independent and
identically distributed normal,
with mean mu and
variance sigma squared, for
observations i being 1 up to n.
We're also going to assume
independent priors.
A normal prior for mu,
with these hyper parameters, and
an inverse gamma prior for sigma squared,
with these hyper parameters.
In this case, we chose a normal prior for
mu because when sigma squared is
a known constant, the normal distribution
is the conjugate prior for mu.
Likewise, in the case where mu is known,
the inverse gamma is the conjugate
prior for sigma squared.
This will give us convenient,
full conditional distributions
in a Gibbs sampler.
Let's first work out the form of
the full posterior distribution.
When we begin analyzing data, the jag
software will complete this step for us.
However, I believe it's extremely
valuable for us to see and
understand how this works.
The joint posterior
distribution from mu and
sigma squared, given all the data,
is going to be proportional to
the joint distribution of everything,
which starts with our likelihood,
the joint distribution of the data,
given the parameters,
times those respective priors.
So let's write out what
these densities look like.
First the likelihood because we
assume that they're independent.
We're going to write their densities
as a product of normal densities
for each individual y,
given those two parameters.
Then we have the prior for mu,
which is a normal density for
mu given those hyper parameters.
And finally, a density for sigma squared.
This inverse gamma,
given its hyper parameters here.
I'm going to keep writing these steps,
but so that you don't have to write and
watch the math happen in real time,
we're going to skip forward.
Okay, I've now done a little bit of
math to complete these next two lines.
All I did was replace these densities for
these distributions with
their actual densities.
So we have the likelihood piece right
here, the normal distribution for
mu right here, and the inverse gamma
distribution for sigma squared right here.
We could also include an indicator
function that sigma squared has to be
greater than zero, but
we know that's true.
To get from this line to this line,
we remember that we're only working
up to proportionality anyway.
So we don't need the multiplying
constants that don't involve mu or
sigma squared here.
So, I was able to remove these 1 over 2 pi
pieces right here,
those are just a multiplicative constant.
But I did have to keep the sigma
squareds because this is a function
of sigma squared.
I brought in this exponential
piece that contains both mu and
sigma squared,
bringing the product inside the exponent.
Then in the normal prior right here,
this piece doesn't contain any mu or
sigma squared, so that can drop
out when we make it proportional.
And this normalizing constant for
the inverse gamma distribution
also does not contain a sigma squared or
a mu, so it can be dropped as well.
So this is the function
we're going to work with.
I've now moved this distribution that
we just derived, the joint distribution
of mu and sigma squared up to
proportionality, up here to the top.
From here it's easy to
continue on to find the two
full conditional
distributions that we need.
The first one we'll look at is mu,
assuming sigma squared
is a known constant.
In which case, it becomes a constant and
is absorbed into the normalizing constant.
So we're going to work on the full
conditional distribution of mu,
given sigma squared, pretending it's
a constant number, and all of the data,
This will be proportional to our full
joint posterior distribution of mu and
sigma squared,
given all the data, Like this.
So we need to take the pieces from
this full joint posterior distribution
that involve mu only,
because now sigma squared is a constant.
So we can drop this piece.
And keep this piece in a likelihood.
This piece also has a mu,
so we need to keep it.
And none of the rest of these contain mu.
They're all multiplied
by this distribution.
So we don't need to keep
any of these pieces here.
This is all we need.
Again, I'm going to skip forward so
we don't have to watch all
of the math in real time.
I've now completed these next two steps,
where we did a little bit more algebra.
In this step, we combined
the two exponents into one, and
in the final step we recognized
that this piece right here is
proportional to a normal density
with this mean and this variance.
There are a lot of intermediate
calculations required right here, but
they're all provided in the supplementary
material from the previous course.
This is just the conjugate update for
a normal mean when the variance is known.
So, given the data and sigma squared,
mu follows this normal distribution.
Now let's look at sigma squared and
we'll assume that mu is known.
So we're going to look at
the full conditional distribution
at sigma squared,
given mu and all of the data.
Again, that is proportional
to our full joint posterior
So we're going to take the pieces
from this expression that involves
sigma squared, and
now mu is thought of as being a constant.
So we're going to keep this first piece,
of course.
And this one as well.
It contains a sigma squared.
This piece right here contains
the hyper parameter for mu, but
not actual sigma squared
parameter is observed there.
So we skip that one.
That gets absorbed into
the normalizing constant.
And we keep this one, which involves
sigma squared And the last piece.
Again, I'll do a couple more
steps on this piece right here.
Let's examine these last two steps.
Here, I combined these two sigma
squared expressions right here,
since they were being
multiplied by each other.
And I combined the two
exponential pieces right here.
If you look at this expression right here,
it turns out this is,
except for a normalizing constant, the
density of an inverse gamma distribution.
So this in fact is proportional
to an inverse gamma density for
sigma squared, with an updated shape
parameter and an updated scale parameter.
These two distributions provide
the basis of a Gibbs sampler to
simulate from a Markov chain,
whose stationary distribution
is the full posterior distribution for
mu and sigma squared.
We simply alternate draws
between these two parameters,
using the most recent draw of one
parameter to update the other.
We're now going to do this
in r in the next segment.
[MUSIC]